= Lab Notebook =

This page ( http://www.iphandbook.org/handbook/ch08/p02/ ) describes a
non-computer research lab notebook.  It is the basis for this lab notebook of
mine.

== A lab notebook is ==
* A daily record of every "experiment" I do, think of doing, or plan to do
* A daily record of my thoughts about all-of-the-above, and their results
* The basis for every "paper" and "thesis" I write (still needs rephrasing)
* The record of what I've done, should I need to produce evidence (e.g. prior art)
* a record that would enable successive "scientists", working on the same
  project, to pick up where I left off or reproduce my results

== lab notebook format ==
Obviously this is not a hardbound book and does not have numbered pages.  For
this reason, this is not the final form for the notebook.  The notebook will
eventually be automatically comitted to a public github repository.

Right now the format is vimwiki.  I've been thinking about how I might want the
notebook indexed (because referring back is so important) and I've been
thinking about using ConTeXt as the notebook native format, with automated
processes to generate an instance of the layout as HTML on my website, complete
with index and TOC.

I will have a separate notebook for work and for personal projects.  They may
be in different formats.  I will not have multiple notebooks for my various
personal projects; they cross-pollinate too much.  That's what topical indexes
are for.

== lab notebook contents ==
Things that go into the notebook (not yet paraphrased):
* A detailed account of every planned and executed "experiment" with the amount
  of detail that would enable a "scientist" "_skilled in the art_" to determine
  what had been done, why it had been done, and what the results were.
* dates accompanying every entry, account, or record
* protocols, reagents, lot numbers in each entry, and where appropriate,
  sketches, descriptions, and so on
* explanations of the signicance of each "experiment", as well as the
  observations, results, and conclusions of the "experiment"
* details of each "experiment" (Remember, what may seem trivial or obvious at
  the time your "experiment" was conducted, may later be of critical
  importance.)
* personal comments are highly appropriate.  However do not make sweeping
  statements, such as "_This procedure is worthless_" or "_We infringe X's
  patent with this procedure_".  Statements like this could affect future
  patentability of your research.
* photographs, computer generated data, and so forth should all be stuck into
  your notebook in such a way that they will not come loose.
* cross-references
* using "preprinted" standard forms
* information with regard to any data that has been electronically captured

== lab notebook contents (from another source) ==
* detailed notes on all discussions and thoughts on "experimental" goals.
  "Pasting" things into the notebook is good.
* detailed "experimental" protocols, with names (or other clear identifiers)
  and clearly worded hypotheses and goals
* justification of all experimental details (species used, temperature,
  reagents, etc).  Either simple logic or references to other/prior work (with
  citations).
* fully-annotated calculations, including units.
* full details of the sources for all experimental organisms
* full details of substrate media and the care and feeding of long-term
  subjects
* "reagent" details (vendor, brand, product number, version, etc)
* Equipment details (has crossover with "reagents" in my usage) (brand, model
  number, serial number, etc)
* environmental conditions
* names of people who helped, including notes about conversations in other
  media (useful for acknowledgements)
* drawings of things, were appropriate
* photographs documenting key details
* locations of data files
* daily entries, even if not much has happened
* purpose for each entry referencing an "experiment" name.
* external data sheets
* _*all*_ mistakes, problems with procedures, lapses in data collection, etc
* standard time notation (both in format and locality)

== keep a lab notebook because... ==
* to provide a complete record of why "experiements" were initiated and how
  they were performed.  It gives me a place to put the reams of data I collect
  and results of the analysis.  "Researchers" who distribute their efforts
  across multiple notebooks, computer files, etc, are unlikely to be effective.
* to encourage sound thinking.  it gives me a forum to talk to myself, to ask
  questions, to jot down important thoughts about experimental design, and how
  the results might eventually be interpreted.
* To provide information to a person who is interested in continuing my
  research project, interested in reproducing or extending my results.
* Notebooks that are kept solely for personal consumption are often illegible,
  incoherent, and worthelss to the broader community.
* If I produce anything of significance, it's possible I might be sued for
  patent infringement and this record might save my bacon.

# textwidth 78
